@c Documentation for the Nios V extensions.

@node Nios V
@chapter Nios V Specific Extensions to @value{GDBN}

This chapter documents the extensions that have been made to
@value{GDBN} for the Nios V project.

@section Custom Instruction Disassembly

@value{GDBN} is able to disassemble instructions that are unique to
a particular RISC-V target, and which are otherwise not known to the
builtin disassembler.  To do this the instructions
are described within an XML file, the format of which is
described below (@pxref{custom_insn_xml_format,,Custom Instruction XML
File Format}).

The custom instruction support is provided as a Python script.  This
script is included in the @value{GDBN} install, but is not loaded by
default into @value{GDBN}.  To load the custom instruction support
execute this command within @value{GDBN}:

@smallexample
(@value{GDBP}) python import gdb.custominsn
@end smallexample

After executing this command, additional settings are available in @value{GDBN}:

@table @code

@kindex set custom-instruction-display
@kindex show custom-instruction-display
@item set custom-instruction-display @r{[}on|off@r{]}
@itemx show custom-instruction-display
This setting controls whether custom instructions should be displayed
or not.  When this setting is @code{on}, the custom instructions will be
disassembled using the XML description file, and printed as part of the
disassembly.  When this setting is @code{off}, custom instructions will be
printed as an unknown instruction in disassembly output. This usually means
using @code{.2byte} for compressed instructions, and @code{.4byte} for
non-compressed instructions. The default is @code{on}. 

@anchor{custom_instruction_filename}
@kindex set custom-instruction-filename
@kindex show custom-instruction-filename
@item set custom-instruction-filename @var{path}
@itemx show custom-instruction-filename
This setting controls the path from which the custom instruction XML
file is loaded.

The custom instruction XML file can be loaded either from the local
machine (on which @value{GDBN} is running), or, if @value{GDBN} is
connected to a remote target (@pxref{Remote Debugging}), the XML file
can be fetched from the remote target, if the remote target supports
this feature.

To load the custom instruction XML file from the local machine,
@var{path} should set to a local path, for example:

@smallexample
(@value{GDBP}) set custom-instruction-filename /tmp/filename.xml
@end smallexample

To load the custom instruction XML file from a remote target,
@var{path} should be set to the name that the remote target expects,
with a @code{remote:} prefix, for example:

@smallexample
(@value{GDBP}) set custom-instruction-filename remote:insn.xml
@end smallexample

This will cause @value{GDBN} to try and fetch the @code{insn.xml} file
from the remote target.  To find which name should be passed to the
remote target, consult the documentation for the remote target.

As a special case, if @var{path} is just @code{remote:} then this is
the same as passing @code{remote:insn.xml}.

Finally, if this setting is set to the empty string then @value{GDBN}
will not try to load any custom instruction XML file.
@end table

@anchor{custom_insn_xml_format}
@subsection Custom Instruction XML File Format
New instructions are specified in an XML file as children of an
@code{instructions} root. This root should have a version
number, and that number should be exactly 1.0. New instructions are 
described as @code{instruction} elements, parameterised by attributes that
describe instruction properties. Valid attributes are
as follows:

@table @samp
@item type (required)
Specify the type of the instruction. Current valid values are:
@samp{R}, @samp{I}, @samp{S}, @samp{J}, @samp{U}, @samp{B}, @samp{CR},
@samp{CI}, @samp{CSS}, @samp{CIW}, @samp{CL}, @samp{CS}, @samp{CB},
@samp{CJ}. 

@item opcode (required)
Specify the opcode of the function. Requires a hex value. This is a
7 bit value for 32 bit instructions, and a 2 bit value for 16 bit
(compressed) instructions. 

@item funct7 (optional)
Specify a 7 bit function code. Requires a hex value. Currently used
only by @samp{R} type instructions.

@item funct4 (optional)
Specify a 4 bit function code. Requires a hex value. Currently used
only by @samp{CR} type instructions.

@item funct3 (optional)
Specify a 3 bit function code. Requires a hex value. Currently used
by @samp{R}, @samp{I}, @samp{S}, @samp{B}, @samp{CI}, @samp{CSS},
@samp{CIW}, @samp{CL}, @samp{CS}, @samp{CB}, and @samp{CJ}
instructions.

@item str (required)
Specify the assembly string of the function. The assembly string can
contain both fixed text (e.g. a function mnemonic) as well as certain
variable fields (denoted with the $ symbol). Supported variable fields
are currently:
    @table @samp
    @item $rd
    Destination register

    @item $rs1
    Source register 1

    @item $rs2
    Source register 2

    @item $uimm
    Unsigned immediate

    @item $imm
    Signed immediate

    @item $dest
    Immediate destination, shown as a symbol
    @end table

@end table

As an example, a valid XML file containing the specification of one
new @samp{R} type instruction, and one new @samp{S} type instruction
might look like:

@smallexample
<instructions version="1.0">
  @w{<instruction type="R" opcode="0x63" funct3="0x2" funct7="0x5"
 str="add_x $rd, $rs1, $rs2"/>}
  @w{<instruction type="S" opcode="0x67" funct3="0x5" str="sw_x $rs2,
 $imm($rs1)"/>}
</instructions>
@end smallexample

@subsection Remote Target Support For Fetching XML Files
To add support to a remote target for fetching the custom instruction
XML file, the target's remote protocol support must be extended.

@value{GDBN} will make use of the @code{qXfer:features:read} packet to
fetch the custom instruction XML file (@pxref{qXfer target description
read}) when the @var{custom-instruction-filename}
(@pxref{custom_instruction_filename,,set custom-instruction-filename}
has the @code{remote:} prefix.  The annex name included in the
@code{qXref} packet will be the filename extracted from the
@var{custom-instruction-filename}.  So, for example, if the user sets
the filename like this:

@smallexample
(@value{GDBP}) set custom-instruction-filename remote:insn.xml
@end smallexample

Then @value{GDBN} will initially send this packet
@code{qXfer:features:read:insn.xml:0,200}.  If the @code{insn.xml} file is
longer than the 200 bytes requested, @value{GDBN} will send additional
packets to fetch the rest of the file, just as it would for reading
the @code{target.xml} target description file.
